#

## NEW HYPOTHESIS

A high emphasis has been placed on the importance of homeownership and housing assets as enablers of a society of owners.

However, less attention has been placed on the rents generated by it complementarily  enabling to constitute such form of societal order.

Through a group of wave-based logistic models we analyse the effect of class on the likelihood of recieving a recurring financial rent and its evolution through time.

REAL ESTATE WEALTH INEQUALITY AND SOCIAL CLASS: A RIF-oriented distributional analysys for the spanish case (2004-2020)

- HY040N,Renta neta procedente del alquiler de una propiedad o terreno en el año anterior al de encuesta
- HY080N,Transferencias periódicas monetarias percibidas de otros hogares en el año anterior al de encuesta
- HY081N,Transferencias periódicas monetarias percibidas de otros hogares en el año anterior al de encuesta (pensiones alimenticias a hijos o compensatorias a cónyuges)
- HY090N,'Intereses, dividendos y ganancias netos de inversiones de capital en empresas no constituidas en sociedad en el año anterior al de encuesta'
- HY090G,'Intereses, dividendos y ganancias brutos de inversiones de capital en empresas no constituidas en sociedad en el año anterior al de encuesta'

## WORKING HYPOTHESIS

- It has been theorized a growing access to other forms of non-labour rents for workers. analysing the EFF in all its waves for a subsample of workers, we analyse the evolution of wealth distribution and composition for workers and the influence of an important set of covariates on it through RIF regressions: the age cohort, being a managerial worker or being multihomeowner or obtaining rental income.

- Previous literature almost exclusively focusses on "wealth inequality" rather than more general an informative "wealth distribution".

- There is a generalized trend towards growing wealth distribution. this fact may be hidden if just focus on the mean but could be detected either clustering population or analysing alternative statistics (mean, GINI). Technically , the recent development of RIF regressions makes this kind of analysis suitable.

- Among the possible categorical clustering, beyond the obvious one like, homeownership, gender of income group, two additional classifications stand out:

- Class (as it expected to become growingly less significant).

- Age because (even considering the natural positive correlation between wealth and age), there is a generalised trend in the last decades, especially among western European countries, towards a growing gap between the wealth of young and other age groups. The preliminary interpretation suggests a growing importance of age clusters for wealth distribution and increasing negative effect on wealth associated to young citizens as compared to the gaps and influence of previous decades.

- In the empirical part, we build our Methodology I'm another important hypothesis: Standard OLS does not correctly grasp  the highly un linear nature of wealth empirical Distributions and RIF regressions on quantiles and Gini should be more robust. for completeness, we report regressions for these 3 main statistics in order to understand the nature of the highly skewed nature of wealth distributions. A nature which we would analyse to finalize our work through the reconstruction of empirical distribution functions through smoothing algorithms.

- A final hypothesis regards the implementation of ML techniques to identify influential factors in wealth distributions. In general, ML algorithms hasn't been yet widely adopted in wealth analysis literature as their inner working privileges "black-box" predictions and partial effects like the ones reported by coefficients in traditional linear regression cannot be normally computed. Nevertheless, ML techniques like gradient boosting can potentially constitute an important tool identifying influential factors on the variable of interest before estimating a traditional GLS model with the meaningful factors. This perspective could be especially interesting when working with multiple year independent surveys which don't allow to construct proper time series for panel analysis but can be pooled for the training dataset where influential factors are identified in the first instance.

## EMPIRICAL SECTION

1. Multiyear exploratory analysis of descriptive statistics

2. Analysis of empirical distributions

3. Mean OLS unconditional regression

4. Median and GINI: RIF GLS unconditional regression

5. Oaxaca-blinder decomposition (start and end of period change analysis

### Structure of the empirical section

Evolution of mean median and Gini of net wealth through 2002-2020.

Identify underlying factors on  wealth distribution through gradient-boost techniques. (Pooling all EFF survey issues in one pooled training set identifying the year).

Personal factors:

- Sex
- Age
- Education

Structural economic factors:

- Class
- Income level
- Homeownership
- Multiproperty
- Financial Portfolio
- Inheritance
- Rental income

---
CONSIDERATIONS:
>
> - Interaction between personal and structural factors (Age vs Class .i.e., young workers).
>
> - Perform RIF regression for GINI and median including the identified influential factors for all the annual issues 2002-2020.
>
> - Oaxaca-Blinder decomposition of GINI for workers, young people and both. Compare 2002 to 2020.

## MAIN BIBLIOGRAPHY

### HOUSING WEALTH

- (Wind,2016): The distribution of housing wealth in 16 EU countries: accounting for institutional differences.
- (Kaas et al., 2019): Homeownership and wealth inequality in Europe.
- (Boertien & López-Gay, 2023): The polarization of real estate ownership and increasing wealth inequality in Spain. ✅

### TOTAL WEALTH

- (Cowell et al.,2017): Wealth top incomes and inequality.
- (Azpirate, 2010): The Household Wealth Distribution in Spain: The Role of Housing and Financial Wealth.  ✅

#### CLASS

- (Duvoux, 2022): Class and relative wealth accumulation in 5 EU countries from HCFS.
- (Westhoff, 2021): Social class and earnings trajectori4es for 14 EU countries.

#### AGE

- (Hwang et al., 2021): Population aging and income inequality.
- (Ihle† & Siebert-Meyerhoff, 2017): The richer the older?  Adecomposition of wealth inequality by age sub-groups.

### WAGE INEQUALITY AND CLASS / TYPE

- (Giangregorio & Manta, 2021): The structure of the labour market and wage inequalitu using RIF-OLS: the italian case.
- (Gradin, 2021): Inequality by population groups and sources of income. Accounting for inequality changes in Spain during the recession.

### ML APPROACHES

- (Salas-Rojo & Rodríguez, 2022): Inheritances and wealth inequality: a machine learning approach. ✅

---
---

## DRAFT NOTES

---

### 1. FIRST STEPS: DEFINE CLASSES FOR ANALYSIS

- Original definitions:
    1. TRABAJADOR: trabajador + desempleado
    2. CAPITALISTA self-employed + employes
    3. JUBILADO retired
    4. INACTIVO inactivo (disabled, student, unactive)
    5. AUTÓNOMO liberal professional + self.employed
    6. DIRECTIVO worker within so called managerial positions

- Construct new classes?? and plot associated empirical distributions.
  1. Multi-employers (+3) + Managers (Employers)
  2. Workers + self_employed  (Workforce)
  3. Retired + inactive (Unactive population)

- If we constrain our sample to potentially active population:
  - Our sample would not loose a lot of observations but would avoid the important bias introduced by retired population of all social classes (which cannot be clearly assignated to a given class)
  - We would have concentrated a proper class analysis into just to main gropus (Employers, Workforce) which is suitable for OB decompositions.

- An alternative approach would imply using the variable p6_81 instead of nsitlabdom:
  - With this change we instead disolve group 3.retired based on past working positions.
  - There is a problem for delimitation of autonomous workers previous 2017

---

> NUEVA OPCIÓN DE RESPUESTA
> P.6.81. ¿DURANTE LA MAYOR PARTE DE SU VIDA LABORAL, CUÁL HA SIDO SU SITUACIÓN?
>
>- Empleado por cuenta ajena.
>
>- Trabajador por cuenta propia con empleados.
>
>- Trabajador por cuenta propia sin empleados (nueva 2017).

---

** OBTAIN SELF-EMPLOYED FOR 6.81 BEFORE OPTION 3 APPEARED (BEFORE 2017)

- We have to combine the response to 2 distinct questions:
    1. P.6.30 -> Response 2 (Only one self-employed job).
    2. P.6.37 -> Response 1 (liberal worker / freelance),
    3. question P.4.105 is asked as p6_36 in 2002-2005 and is complementary (juridic nature of bussiness) stored as "auton".
- Afterwards we have to move self-employed from employers for all years:

```r
# take all self_employeds meeting both 6.30 and p6.37 conditions to a new category
dt_eff[ p6_30 %in% 2 & p6_37 %in% 1, p6_81] <- 3
```

- INHERITANCE IS ONLY ASKED FROM 2008 AS P.9.18

- FINANCIAL GAINS:
  - p4_16 -> public shares profit
  - p4_25 -> non-public shares profit
  - p4_112 -> bussiness profit
  - sell of assets: p7_8a
  - p4_36 fixed income assets profit
  - p4_40 other fin assets profit

- REAL GAINS (rental income):
  - p2_43_0 (total gains)

- ALL RENTS:
  - (real and financial): p7_1 (category) p7_2 (amount)

### 2. OTHER TASKS

- Get the remaining variables needed to include:
  - Multiprop
  - Inheritance
  - Rental income
  - Education

- Check how the growing inequality in real state wealth -less homeownership, growing multiproperty (Boertien & López-Gay, 2023)- has been distributed among social classes.
